Is it more effective to have strict measures followed by a small part of the population, or to adopt moderate measures that a larger part of the population is likely to be willing to adhere to?

As long as no treatment nor vaccine exist for an infectious disease, the first attempts to slow down its spread are based on the introduction of control measures to limit contacts within the population. The effectiveness of these measures is determined, among other factors, by the level of compliance in the population, that is how many people actually adhere to the regulations. The question arises as to whether it is more effective to introduce very strict measures, which are likely to be adhered to by only a small part of the population, or to adopt moderate measures, which a presumably larger part of the population would be willing to comply with.

CoSiMo-Webtool users can answer this question with the simulation tool provided here. In the underlying mathematical model, a moderate increase in the number of infections corresponding to a reproduction number of about 1.5 is simulated first. In the case of SARS-CoV-2 (pathogen of COVID-19), this value corresponds to a significant reduction in contacts in the entire population (compared to pre-COVID-era). To effectively contain a wave of infection, a reproduction number lower than 1 is necessary. At a specified point in time additional contact restrictions are introduced in the simulations. CoSiMo-Webtool users can select (i) the severity of the measures (contact reduction factor) and (ii) the proportion of the population that adheres to the additional measures (compliance level). The users can then choose which information from the model (for example new infections, cumulative infections, or total number of deaths) they want to visualize. In this way the user can observe how the course of the outbreak develops from the time the contact restrictions are introduced.

---

Disclaimer: In reality, the compliance degree with contact restriction measures will be different from person to person. In the mathematical model underlying these simulations the population is divided into two groups, with one group fully following the new measures (“compliant”) and the other group not modifying their behavior (“noncompliant”) after restrictions are introduced. It was also assumed that nobody changes from one group (“compliant” or “noncompliant”) to the other one. Further information on the model and the mathematical background can be found here:

Barbarossa, M.V.; Fuhrmann, J.  
Compliance with NPIs and Possible Deleterious Effects on Mitigation of an Epidemic Outbreak, Preprints 2021, 
https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202102.0178/v2a